

1 Terabyte = 1024 Gigabytes
1 Petabyte = 1024 Terabytes
1 Exabyte = 1024 Petabytes
1 Zettabyte = 1024 Exabytes



    Every day, we create 2.5 quintillion bytes of data—so much that 90 % of the
    data in the world today has been created in the last two years alone. This data
    comes from everywhere: sensors used to gather climate information, posts to
    social media sites, digital pictures and videos, purchase transaction records,
    and cell phone GPS signals to name a few. This data is big data.

    


    The four V's that describe big data are:



        [Volume]

            As we have seen, the most obvious characteristic of Big Data is that it is BIG.
            It may even be so big that an organisation needs to look for new tools and techniques to store and 
            query it.  This volume therefore is likely to be the biggest
            challenge for data professionals in the near future. It may result in the need for
            scalable distributed storage and querying, and many will turn to Cloud computing to meet those needs.


        [Velocity]


            Describes the speed at which data is generated and needs to be processed. Big data often involves real-time or 
            near-real-time data streams that require quick analysis and decision-making.




        [Variety]       

            Represents the diverse types and formats of data that are part of big data. 
            It includes structured data (e.g., databases), unstructured data (e.g., text, images, videos), 
            and semi-structured data (e.g., XML, JSON). 
            Big data systems must be capable of handling this variety of data.


        [Veracity] الداتا تمام فبا موثوقيه مش فيك

            Refers to the quality and reliability of the data. 
            Big data can include data from various sources, 
            and ensuring its accuracy and trustworthiness is crucial for making informed decisions. 
            Veracity involves dealing with data inconsistencies, errors, and biases that may be present in the data.




        In general, then, big data analytics is about exploring large volumes of data looking for trends, 
        anomalies, previously unknown correlations and obscure patterns
        which can be used to an organisation’s advantage by evidencing 
        some sort of prediction upon which better business decisions are taken