
[Transaction]
Basically a transaction is one or more operations that make up a single task.
Operations fall into one of four categories; Create, Read, Update or Delete (so called CRUDing).


[ACID]

Atomicity   => all or nothing aproach

      This means if any part of a transaction fails, the entire transaction is deemed to have
      failed and the database is returned to the state it was in before the transaction started.
      This returning to the original state is known as rollback. On the other hand, if the
      transaction completes successfully the database is permanently updated—a process
      known as commit.
      [rollback] database returning to the original state 
      [commit] if the transaction completes successfully the database is permanently updated—a process

Consistency =>  سليمة  trans مش عايز زرط في الداتا بيز زي ما لقيتها سليمة سبها بعد ال 
      
      means data written to a database must be valid according to defined rules                
      In a relational database this includes constraints which determine the validity of data entere 
      كدا انت حرامي والداتا بيز  Customer_id مينفعش يبرنس الاقيك مثلا مطلع فاتوره من المكنه مش مكتوب فيها ال 
      هتف في وشك بأيرور

Isolation   =>   حاجة متخصنيش نهائي الي ليا  SERIAL  تشتغل  PARALLEL بص يصحبي تشتغل 
                 لو هتشتغل لمؤاخذه علي التوازي الاقي النتيجه بتاعتي صح اكني شغال لواحدي 
                 sures that transactions being executed in parallel would result in a final state identical 
                 to that which would be arrived at if the transactions were executed serially.
                 This is important for on line systems. For example, consider two users simultaneously 
                 attempting to buy the last seat on an airline flight. Both would initially see that a seat was available,
                 but only one can buy it. The first to commit to buying by pressing the purchase button 
                 and having the purchase approved would cause the other users transaction to stop 
                 and any entered data (like name and address) to be rolled back.

Durability  =>  Transaction DONE الكلام ده يبرنس معناه ان طالما ظهرلي ان ال
                مليش فيه بقا السيستم ولع وقع حصل مشكله في البرنامج بتاعي الي ليا فيه ان لما الدنيا ترجع
                 الاقي الكلام مظبوط زي الفل اكن مفيش مشاكل حصلت 

                 is the property by which once a transaction has been committed, it
                 will stay committed. From the previous example, if our buyer of the last seat on the
                 aeroplane has finished their transaction, received a success message but the system
                 crashes for whatever reason before the final update is applied, the user would reasonably 
                 think their purchase was a success. Details of the transaction would have to
                 be stored in a non-volatile area to allow them to be processed when the system was
                 restored



[Two-Phase Commit]

way of dealing with transactions where the database is held on more than one server - distributed database -

database management system must coordinate the committing or rolling back of
transactions as a self-contained unit on all database components no matter where
they are physically located   => الكلام ده معناه اني مليش فيه انا عايز التعديلات تبان اكني شغال علي 
                                                                                         جهاز واحد بس 

The two phases are 

*  - the request phase -
    a coordinating process sends a query to commit message
    to all other processes. The expected response is ‘YES’ otherwise the transaction aborts


* the commit phase
    Coordinating process sends a query to commit message to all other processes.
    The expected response is ‘YES’ otherwise the transaction aborts




[relational Database]

The basis of a relational system is a series of tables of records each with specific attributes linked by a series of joins.
These joins are created using foreign keys which are attribute(s) containing the same data as another tables primary key.
A primary key is a unique identifier of a record in a table. This approach to data storage 
was very efficient in terms of the disk space used and the speed of access to records



[Data Warehouse] 

ايه المشكله مع الداتا بيز العاديه ؟

id | F_name | L_name | Gpa | Year
---------------------------------
1  | mohmd  | SQL    | 3.2 | 2024
2  | sayed  | Java   | 2.7 | 1897

 ارجع ليه لان الي موجود معايا هو الداتا الحاليه الصحيحه الي شغال يبها History   بمعني اني معنديش اي  update مشكلتي يبرنس اني كل شويه بعمل  
 طب ماشي دلوقتي عندي داتا بقالها مثلا بتاع 5 او 6 سنين عايز اتعامل معاها اعمل ايه ؟؟ عايز اخد قرار ليه علاقه بالبيزنيس بتاعي 

    <-  اااااااااااه 
   commit   لو حد عمل اي حاجه معفنه حتي في الداتا بيز  Warehouse هنا يجي دور ال 
   شكرا هروح اعنيه عندي عشان اعمل 
   History

   A problem with an operational database is that individual records within it are continually being updated,
   therefore it is difficult to do an analysis based on historical
   data unless you actively store it. The concept behind a data warehouse is that it can
   store data generated by different systems in the organisation, not just transactions
   form the database. This data can then be analysed and the results of the analysis
   used to make decisions and inform the strategic direction of an organisation


   A data warehouse is a central repository of data in an organisation storing historical data and being constantly 
   added to by current transactions. The data can be analysed to produce trend reports.
   It can also be analysed using data mining techniques for generating strategic information.
   Unlike data in a relational database, data in a data warehouse is organised in a de-normalised format 


[Data mining]

    is a process of extracting information from a data warehouse and transforming it into an understandable structure.


    There are a number of steps in the process:
       
        • Data cleansing were erroneous and duplicate data is removed. It is not uncommon in raw data to have duplicate data
          where there is only a minor difference, for example two customer records may be identical, but one contains a suburb
          name as part of the address and one does not. One needs removing.
        • Initial Analysis where the quality and distribution of the data is determined.
          This is done to determine if there is any bias or other problems in the data distribution
        • Main analysis where statistical models are applied to answer some question, usually asked management



[Big Data]

        the amount of data available that an organisation can collect and analyse has been growing rapidly. The first reference to big data on
        Gartner’s Hype Cycle of emerging technologies was in 2011 when it was referred to as ‘Big Data and Extreme Information Processing and Management’. 
        As a term it grew out of data warehousing recognising the growth of storage needed to handle massive datasets some organisations were generating


[Data in the Cloud]

        •  Cloud computing is distributed computing where the application and data a user
           may be working with is located somewhere on the internet.


        •  The impact on database systems is you no longer have to worry about local storage issues because
           you can purchase a data platform as a service in the cloud. It also
           means whatever an organisations definition of big data is, there is a cost effective
           way of storing and analysing that data. Although concerns have been raised about
           security including backup and recovery of cloud services, they are probably better
           than policies and practice in place at most small to medium sized businesses 



[The Need for Speed]

    The time taken has three components:
       
       • seek time
            which is how long it takes the read/write head to move over the disk
       
       • rotational latency
            basically the average time it takes the disk to rotate so the record
            you want is actually under the read/write head.
            ما أنت عارف يبرنس ان الديسك فيه ابره شغاله بتلف عشان تجبلك الداتا بتاعتك
       
       • Transfer rate Data then has to be moved from the disk to the processor—the data .


    how to deal with this  ?

    - The first is to move the entire database into memory

    - The second is to use a different access strategy to that provided by the database management system


[In-Memory Database]

    Put the entere database in memory


            - BUT NOTE -

    a relational database is designed for data stored on disk and helps optimise the time taken to transfer data to memory.
    This is no longer an issue as the data is already in memory meaning other ways of organising and accessing data can
    be implemented



[ NoSQL Database ]

    واحده من اكبر مشاكل الداتا بيز بتاعتي انها كانت يا ولدي دايما بتحكم الموضوع في شكل اوبجيكت عشان اعرف احطك في 
    Row and Colums ====> So can make record store in table 

   - optimise for scalce كمان مش احسن حاجه في انها تعمل 
     ودي مشكله كبيره جدا خصوصا لما ظهرت حاجه وي البيج داتا 
     بعدين اصلا انا كنت بتستخدمها عشان اعرف اخلي الدنيا سهله لما اجي اتعامل مع الديسك 
     دلوقتي الداتا كلها عندي في الميموري فا عايز طريقه مختلفه عشان اعرف اتعامل

   - here is the form of the data which
    people want to store, analyse and retrieve. Tweets from Twitter are data that do not
    easily fit a relational or object oriented structure. Instead column based approaches
    were a column is the smallest unit of storage or a document based approach where
    data is denormalised can be applied
    